Added docs for app health checks (#2870)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/observability/app-health.md

---
type: docs
title: "App health checks"
linkTitle: "App health checks"
weight: 300
description: Reacting to apps' health status changes
---

> App health checks is a preview feature that allows probing for the health of your application and reacting to status changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
App health checks is a feature that allows probing for the health of your application and reacting to status changes.
```

> Applications can become unresponsive for a variety of reasons: for example, they could be too busy to accept new work, or could be crashed or in a deadlock state. Sometimes the condition can be transitory, for example if the app is just busy (and will eventually be able to resume accepting new work), or if the application is being restarted for whatever reason and is in its initialization phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications can become unresponsive for a variety of reasons: for example, they could be too busy to accept new work, could have crashed, or be in a deadlock state. Sometimes the condition can be transitory, for example if the app is just busy (and will eventually be able to resume accepting new work), or if the application is being restarted for whatever reason and is in its initialization phase.
```

> When app health checks are enabled, the Dapr *runtime* (also known as the *sidecar*) will periodically poll your application via HTTP or gRPC calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When app health checks are enabled, the Dapr *runtime* (sidecar) periodically polls your application via HTTP or gRPC calls.
```

When it detects a failure in the app's health, Dapr stops accepting new work on behalf of the application by:

> - Unsubscribing from all pub/sub subscriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unsubscribing from all pub/sub subscription messages
```

Author: Same, this actually stop the subscriptions and not just the messages

> - Stopping all input bindings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stopping all incoming requests from input bindings
```

Author: Actually this is not correct. It stops the input bindings entirely doesn't just stop sending incoming requests from the app

> - Short-circuiting all service-invocation requests, which terminate in the Dapr runtime and are not forwarded to the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stopping all service-invocation requests, which terminate in the Dapr runtime and are not forwarded to the application.
```

Author: I think short-circuiting here gives a better idea of the fact that the requests can still happen but the sidecar terminates them earlier, before even trying to hit the app.

> These changes are meant to be temporary, and Dapr will resume normal operations once it detects that the application is responsive again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These changes are meant to be temporary, and Dapr resumes normal operations once it detects that the application is responsive again.
```

App health checks are disabled by default.

### App health checks vs platform-level health checks

App health checks in Dapr are meant to be complementary to, and not replace, any platform-level health checks, like [liveness probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/) when running on Kubernetes.  

Platform-level health checks (or liveness probes) generally ensure that the application is running, and cause the platform to restart the application (or, in case of Kubernetes, pod) in case of failures.  
Unlike platform-level health checks, Dapr's app health checks focus on pausing work to an application that is currently unable to accept it, but is expected to be able to resume accepting work *eventually*. Goals include:

- Not bringing more load to an application that is already overloaded.

> - Do the "polite" thing by not taking messages from queues or pub/subs when Dapr knows the application won't be able to process them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do the "polite" thing by not taking messages from queues, bindings, or pub/sub brokers when Dapr knows the application won't be able to process them.
```

| `--enable-app-health-check`   | `dapr.io/enable-app-health-check`   | Boolean that enables the health checks | Disabled  |
| `--app-health-check-path`     | `dapr.io/app-health-check-path`     | Path that Dapr invokes for health probes when the app channel is HTTP (this value is ignored if the app channel is using gRPC) | `/health` |
| `--app-health-probe-interval` | `dapr.io/app-health-probe-interval` | Number of *seconds* between each health probe | `5` |
| `--app-health-probe-timeout`  | `dapr.io/app-health-probe-timeout`  | Timeout in *milliseconds* for health probe requests | `500` |
| `--app-health-threshold`      | `dapr.io/app-health-threshold`     | Max number of consecutive failures before the app is considered unhealthy | `3` |

> See the [full Dapr arguments and annotations reference]({{<ref arguments-annotations-overview>}}) for all options and how to enable them.

Additionally, app health checks are impacted by the protocol used for the app channel, which is configured with the `--app-protocol` flag (self-hosted) or the `dapr.io/app-protocol` annotation (Kubernetes); supported values are `http` (default) or `grpc`.

### Health check paths

> When using HTTP for `app-protocol`, Dapr will perform health probes by making an HTTP call to the path specified in `app-health-check-path`, which is `/health` by default.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using HTTP for `app-protocol`, Dapr performs health probes by making an HTTP call to the path specified in `app-health-check-path`, which is `/health` by default.  
```

> For your app to be considered healthy, the response must have an HTTP status code in the 200-299 range. Any other status code is considered a failure. Dapr is only concerned with the status code of the response, and will ignore any response header or body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For your app to be considered healthy, the response must have an HTTP status code in the 200-299 range. Any other status code is considered a failure. Dapr is only concerned with the status code of the response, and ignores any response header or body.
```

> When using gRPC for the app channel, Dapr will invoke the method `/dapr.proto.runtime.v1.AppCallbackHealthCheck/HealthCheck` in your application. Most likely, you will use a Dapr SDK to implement the handler for this method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using gRPC for the app channel, Dapr invokes the method `/dapr.proto.runtime.v1.AppCallbackHealthCheck/HealthCheck` in your application. Most likely, you will use a Dapr SDK to implement the handler for this method.
```

While responding to a health probe request, your app *may* decide to perform additional internal health checks to determine if it's ready to process work from the Dapr runtime. However, this is not required; it's a choice that depends on your application's needs.

### Intervals, timeouts, and thresholds

When app health checks are enabled, by default Dapr probes your application every 5 seconds. You can configure the interval, in seconds, with `app-health-probe-interval`. These probes happen regularly, regardless of whether your application is healthy or not.

> When the Dapr runtime (sidecar) is initially started, Dapr waits for a successful health probe before considering the app healthy. This means that pub/sub subscriptions, input bindings, and service invocation won't be enabled for your app until this first health check is complete and successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Dapr runtime (sidecar) is initially started, Dapr waits for a successful health probe before considering the app healthy. This means that pub/sub subscriptions, input bindings, and service invocation requests won't be enabled for your application until this first health check is complete and successful.
```

Health probe requests are considered successful if the application sends a successful response (as explained above) within the timeout configured in `app-health-probe-timeout`. The default value is 500, corresponding to 500 milliseconds (i.e. half a second).

> Before Dapr considers an app to have entered an unhealthy state, it will wait for `app-health-threshold` consecutive failures, whose default value is 3.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before Dapr considers an app to have entered an unhealthy state, it waits for `app-health-threshold` consecutive failures, whose default value is 3.  
```

This default value means that your application must fail health probes 3 times *in a row* to be considered unhealthy.  

> If you set the threshold to 1, any failure will cause Dapr to assume your app is unhealthy and will stop delivering work to it.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you set the threshold to 1, any failure causes Dapr to assume your app is unhealthy and will stop delivering work to it.  
```

{{< tabs "Self-Hosted (CLI)" Kubernetes >}}

{{% codetab %}}

Use the CLI flags with the `dapr run` command to enable app health checks:

```sh
dapr run \
  --app-id my-app \
  --app-port 7001 \
  --app-protocol http \
  --enable-app-health-check \
  --app-health-check-path=/healthz \
  --app-health-probe-interval 3 \
  --app-health-probe-timeout 200 \
  --app-health-threshold 2 \
  -- \
    <command to execute>
```

{{% /codetab %}}

{{% codetab %}}

To enable app health checks in Kubernetes, add the relevant annotations to your Deployment:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: my-app
  labels:
    app: my-app
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: my-app
      annotations:
        dapr.io/enabled: "true"
        dapr.io/app-id: "my-app"
        dapr.io/app-port: "7001"
        dapr.io/app-protocol: "http"
        dapr.io/enable-app-health-check: "true"
        dapr.io/app-health-check-path: "/healthz"
        dapr.io/app-health-probe-interval: "3"
        dapr.io/app-health-probe-timeout: "200"
        dapr.io/app-health-threshold: "2"
```

{{% /codetab %}}

> {{< /tabs >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< /tabs >}}

## Demo

Watch [this video for an overview of using the application health checks](https://youtu.be/srczBuOsAkI?t=533):

<iframe width="360" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/srczBuOsAkI?start=533" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
```

---
type: docs
title: "App health checks"
linkTitle: "App health checks"
weight: 300
description: Reacting to apps' health status changes
---

> App health checks is a feature of Dapr that allows probing for the health of your application and reacting to status changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
App health checks is a preview feature that allows probing for the health of your application and reacting to status changes.
```

> Applications can become unresponsive for a variety of reasons: for example, they could be too busy to accept new work, or could be crashed or in a deadlock state. Sometimes the condition can be transitory, for example if the app is just busy (and will eventually be able to resume accepting new work), or if the application is being restarted for whatever reason and is in its initialization phase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications can become unresponsive for a variety of reasons, such as:

 - Too busy to accept new work
 - Crashed state
 - In a deadlock state
 - In initialization phase after being restarted
```

Author: I would prefer this as inline as it was just a list of examples, not exhaustive and also more informational than other

When app health checks are enabled, the Dapr *runtime* (also known as the *sidecar*) will periodically poll your application via HTTP or gRPC calls.

> When it detects a failure in the app's health, Dapr stops accepting new work on behalf of the application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it detects a failure in the app's health, Dapr stops accepting new work on behalf of the application by:
```

> - Unsubscribes from all pub/sub subscriptions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Unsubscribing from all pub/sub subscriptions
```

> - Stops all input bindings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Stopping all input bindings
```

> - Short-circuits all service-invocation requests, which terminate in the Dapr runtime and are not forwarded to the application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Short-circuiting all service-invocation requests, which terminate in the Dapr runtime and are not forwarded to the application
```

> These changes are meant to be temporary, and Dapr will resume normal operations once it detects that the application becomes responsive again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes are meant to be temporary, and Dapr will resume normal operations once it detects that the application is responsive again.
```

> App health checks are disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Ok to remove since we mention this later?

Author: Your call, but I do believe  _repetita iuvant_ sometimes :)

Reviewer 2: ok! I'm open either way :)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## App health checks vs platform-level health checks

```

> > App health checks in Dapr are meant to be complementary to, and not replace, any platform-level health checks, for example [liveness probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/) when running on Kubernetes.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
App health checks in Dapr are meant to be complementary to, and not replace, any platform-level health checks, like [liveness probes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/), when running on Kubernetes.  
```

> > Platform-level health checks (or liveness probes) are generally meant to ensure that the application is running, and cause the platform to restart the application (or, in case of Kubernetes, pod) in case of failures.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Platform-level health checks (or liveness probes) generally ensure that the application is running, and cause the platform to restart the application (or, in case of Kubernetes, pod) in case of failures.  
```

> > Dapr's app health checks are instead concerned with not bringing more work to an application that is not currently in a condition to accept it, but that it is expected to be able to resume doing so *eventually*. Goals include not bringing more load to an application that is already overloaded, as well as being "polite" and not taking messages from the likes of queues or pub/subs when Dapr knows the application won't be able to process them. In this regard, Dapr's app health checks are "softer" and are about waiting for an application to be able to process work, rather than terminating the running process in a "hard" way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike platform-level health checks, Dapr's app health checks focus on pausing work to an application that is currently unable to accept it, but is expected to be able to resume accepting work *eventually*. Goals include:
- Not bringing more load to an application that is already overloaded.
- "Politely" not taking messages from queues or pub/subs when Dapr knows the application won't be able to process them. 

In this regard, Dapr's app health checks are "softer", waiting for an application to be able to process work, rather than terminating the running process in a "hard" way.
```

## Configuring app health checks

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

> App health checks are currently a **preview feature** and require the `AppHealthCheck` feature flag to be enabled. Please refer to the documentation for [enabling preview features]({{<ref support-preview-features>}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
App health checks are currently a **preview feature** and require the `AppHealthCheck` feature flag to be enabled. Refer to the documentation for [enabling preview features]({{<ref support-preview-features>}}).
```

{{% /alert %}}

> App health checks are enabled with the `--enable-app-health-check` CLI flag, or the `dapr.io/enable-app-health-check: true` annotation when running on Kubernetes; they are disabled by default. Adding this flag is both necessary and sufficient to enable app health checks with the default options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
App health checks are disabled by default, but can be enabled with either:

- The `--enable-app-health-check` CLI flag; or
- The `dapr.io/enable-app-health-check: true` annotation when running on Kubernetes.

Adding this flag is both necessary and sufficient to enable app health checks with the default options.
```

Author: I think the list here doesn't reflect that it's an `or`, sounds more like an `and`

Reviewer 2: I agree. Updated my suggestion... is that better?

The full list of options are listed in this table:

| CLI flags                     | Kubernetes deployment annotation    | Description | Default value |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ----------- | ------------- |
| `--enable-app-health-check`   | `dapr.io/enable-app-health-check`   | Boolean that enables the health checks | Disabled  |
| `--app-health-check-path`     | `dapr.io/app-health-check-path`     | Path that Dapr invokes for health probes when the app channel is HTTP (this value is ignored if the app channel is using gRPC) | `/health` |
| `--app-health-probe-interval` | `dapr.io/app-health-probe-interval` | Number of *seconds* between each health probe | `5` |
| `--app-health-probe-timeout`  | `dapr.io/app-health-probe-timeout`  | Timeout in *milliseconds* for health probe requests | `500` |

> | `--app-health-threshold`      | `dapr.io/app-health-threshold"`     | Max number of consecutive failures before the app is considered un-healthy | `3` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `--app-health-threshold`      | `dapr.io/app-health-threshold"`     | Max number of consecutive failures before the app is considered unhealthy | `3` |
```

> > See the [full reference]({{<ref arguments-annotations-overview>}}) for Dapr arguments and annotations for all options and how to enable them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> See the [full Dapr arguments and annotations reference]({{<ref arguments-annotations-overview>}}) for all options and how to enable them.
```

> Additionally, app health checks are impacted by the protocol used for the app channel, which is configured with the `--app-protocol` flag or the `dapr.io/app-protocol` annotation; supported values are `http` (default) or `grpc`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, app health checks are impacted by the protocol used for the app channel, which is configured with the `--app-protocol` flag (self-hosted) or the `dapr.io/app-protocol` annotation (Kubernetes); supported values are `http` (default) or `grpc`.
```

### Health check paths

> When using HTTP for `app-protocol`, Dapr will perform health probes by making a HTTP call to the path specified in `app-health-check-path`, which is `/health` by default.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using HTTP for `app-protocol`, Dapr will perform health probes by making an HTTP call to the path specified in `app-health-check-path`, which is `/health` by default.  
```

Author: Isn't it "an HTTP" because HTTP is pronounced "aitch"?

Reviewer 2: Yep, even though HTTP technically starts with a consonant, it sounds like it starts with a vowel... it's all in the sound :)

> For your app to be considered healthy, the response must have an HTTP status code in the 200-299 range; any other status code is considered a failure. Dapr is only concerned with the status code of the response, and will ignore any response header or body.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For your app to be considered healthy, the response must have an HTTP status code in the 200-299 range. Any other status code is considered a failure. Dapr is only concerned with the status code of the response, and will ignore any response header or body.
```

When using gRPC for the app channel, Dapr will invoke the method `/dapr.proto.runtime.v1.AppCallbackHealthCheck/HealthCheck` in your application. Most likely, you will use a Dapr SDK to implement the handler for this method.

> While responding to a health probe request, your app *may* decide to perform additional internal health checks to determine if it's actually in a state where it's ready to process work from the Dapr runtime. However, this is not required, and it's a choice that depends on your application's needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While responding to a health probe request, your app *may* decide to perform additional internal health checks to determine if it's ready to process work from the Dapr runtime. However, this is not required; it's a choice that depends on your application's needs.
```

### Intervals, timeouts, and thresholds

> When app health checks are enabled, by default Dapr probes your application every 5 seconds; you can configure the interval, in seconds, with `app-health-probe-interval`. These probes happen regularly, regardless of whether your application is healthy or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When app health checks are enabled, by default Dapr probes your application every 5 seconds. You can configure the interval, in seconds, with `app-health-probe-interval`. These probes happen regularly, regardless of whether your application is healthy or not.
```

> When the Dapr runtime (sidecar) is first started, Dapr waits for a first, successful health probe before considering the app healthy. This means that pub/sub subscriptions, input bindings, and service invocation won't be enabled for your app until a first health check is complete and successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the Dapr runtime (sidecar) is initially started, Dapr waits for a successful health probe before considering the app healthy. This means that pub/sub subscriptions, input bindings, and service invocation won't be enabled for your app until this first health check is complete and successful.
```

Health probe requests are considered successful if the application sends a successful response (as explained above) within the timeout configured in `app-health-probe-timeout`. The default value is 500, corresponding to 500 milliseconds (i.e. half a second).

> Before Dapr considers an app to have entered an un-healthy state, it will wait for `app-health-threshold` consecutive failures, whose default value is 3.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before Dapr considers an app to have entered an unhealthy state, it will wait for `app-health-threshold` consecutive failures, whose default value is 3.  
```

> With the default value, it means that your application must be fail health probes 3 times *in a row* to be considered un-healthy.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This default value means that your application must fail health probes 3 times *in a row* to be considered unhealthy.  
```

If you set the threshold to 1, any failure will cause Dapr to assume your app is unhealthy and will stop delivering work to it.  

> A threshold greater than 1 can help exclude transient failures due to external circumstances; the right value for your application depends on your requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A threshold greater than 1 can help exclude transient failures due to external circumstances. The right value for your application depends on your requirements.
```

> Note that thresholds only apply to failures. A single successful response is enough for Dapr to consider your app to be healthy and resume normal operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thresholds only apply to failures. A single successful response is enough for Dapr to consider your app to be healthy and resume normal operations.
```
